So the summary is that we decided last year to create a not-for-profit development group
to work on the Apache Arrow project, which I will tell you about.
There's a number of reasons why we decided to do this.
Partly because the Arrow project does involve the R world, but it involves the Python world
and many other programming language ecosystems, and we wanted to be able to build relationships
with many different companies around the world that want data science tools to become faster
and more scalable into the future.
So Hadley and I are the leadership for the organization.
We are now five full-time engineers, so we've got three people in North America, two people
in Europe, so Ben and Francois are here, so if you see them, please say hello.
Folks from the Tidyverse team are involved on a part-time basis to work on the R side
of things.
We are still hiring, so if you know anyone who likes to work on database systems or likes
to do benchmarking and test and build automation, we have a lot of that to do, so please definitely
get in touch.
So as Tarif was saying in his keynote earlier today, RStudio has been really amazing in
helping us get this off the ground by essentially making it so that I don't have the overhead
of having to run a company, can focus on doing software engineering.
I used to work at Two Sigma.
They're continuing to sponsor the work, and we've had NVIDIA and also the Open Data Science
Conference join as sponsors for 2019, so NVIDIA just gave us some really high-end hardware
to do testing for the software, so that's been great.
So the executive summary of what this is all about is that if you look at how data science
tools work now, like Base R, NumPy, SciPy, the Python ecosystem, MATLAB, a lot of the
semantics of how these tools work are based on the way that computational systems worked
in the 1980s and 1990s, so everything's built on a foundation of 30- to 40-year-old Fortran
code.
We have seen tools augmented with multi-core algorithms and some more sophisticated execution,
but in general, you have things that are single-core, that evaluate eagerly.
The language ecosystems are pretty fragmented, so you very rarely see R programmers collaborating
with Python programmers and sharing libraries of code to power their applications.
So the world that I would like to see is to be able to take advantage of all this fancy
hardware that we have now.
We have graphics cards, we have computers, you can buy a desktop with 16 physical cores
and 32 virtual cores, so you should be able to take advantage of that.
We can compile code at runtime and generate custom functions that are specialized for
your hardware, but a big part also is that I would like to see the language ecosystems
able to collaborate and share code and data.
So one reason that not as much of this work has happened yet has been because of Moore's
Law and, you know, if your code runs slow, you can just wait because in a couple of years
your processor will be twice as fast and that has essentially stopped happening, so we need
to get more out of the hardware that we have because it's not getting that much faster
year over year.
Although we do have graphics cards, which seemingly are, you know, continuing to scale
and have thousands of cores on a single graphics card.
So the Arrow project, so I helped launch the project about three years ago and our central
idea is that we wanted to define a language independent open standard for data frames.
And you might say, well, we have data frames in R and data frames in Python, but if you
look under the hood how those data frames are implemented, how they're arranged in memory,
the memory representation is very different.
And so as a result of that, you can't really share code and if you want to share data from
one runtime environment to another, you have to serialize, which is very expensive.
So essentially the view of the world that we would like to see is to have tools able
to collaborate and work on a common data representation that is not tied to a particular runtime environment
or programming language.
So kind of the bird's eye view, if you think, and where the project is going, and since
I have zero time now, but what I would like to do and the way that we've been building
the community is to bring together the data science world with the analytic database community.
So a lot of the performance and scalability work in working with big data, I don't know
if we're still saying big data now, a lot of that work has happened in the analytic
database world and relatively little work has made its way into the data science ecosystem.
And if you look at the way that database engines are built, typically you interact with them
through SQL or some other frontend API, usually it's SQL queries, but those queries then interact
with a bunch of components that deal with query execution, in memory, data management,
and interactions with storage and essentially whether it's disk or cloud storage or whatever.
So what we were doing in the Arrow project is building a set of high-quality components
that have public APIs that can be used as the basis of building different kinds of essentially
embedded database engines that can be run on a laptop or run kind of in a distributed
cluster.
But we aren't really being prescriptive about the frontend, so if you want to build a database,
you can build a database, if you want to build a data frame library or build something that
can be used by an R or Python programmer, you can do that as well.
So we have three primary use cases, and I'm going to tell you very briefly about how this
is relevant to R programmers, but the three big things that we're concerned with is getting
faster access to data, so being able to read and write datasets in the most important file
formats as fast as possible.
We want to be able to move around data as efficiently as possible within a single node,
so between one process and another through shared memory, or moving data between nodes
in a network through remote procedure calls, so through sockets or other inter-node communication.
The last, so the last thing is that we want to be able to compute analytics, and so if
you're using R, you're using Python, you're already doing analytics every day when you
use data frame libraries, so these would be standardized libraries of algorithms that
could be used in many different scenarios, and we want to be able to take advantage of
the latest and greatest in compiler technology to be able to do specialization of functions
to go even faster based on prior knowledge of what you're doing with your data.
So how is this all relevant to R?
Well, we are building bindings for the Arrow libraries, which are mostly written in C++,
so that work on the R side has been led by Romain Francois, who you may know from the
dplyr project.
So I will talk about R data frames, because I have no time, but the key use cases where
there's a lot of interest in the R world is being able to memory map and interact with
very large on-disk data sets that don't fit into memory.
We want to be able to, this is not about replacing dplyr or replacing data.table, it's
about having tools that can be used to accelerate these projects while leaving the user interface,
like with the code that you write, largely unchanged.
So you may know about dplyr, dplyr is already a domain-specific language where you write
a sequence of dplyr verbs and expressions, and then those expressions are effectively
compiled into whatever backend where dplyr is executing.
So dplyr can execute against SQL engines or it can execute using its in-memory engine.
And so what our goal is to do is if you do have a very large data set which is coming
out of code in the arrow ecosystem, whether it's memory mapped on-disk data, or maybe
you have a directory of parquet files, or maybe a set of cloud buckets that contain
parquet files.
So using dplyr, you may have an arrow data set and a collection of dplyr verbs, and so
we can translate these standard dplyr expressions into computation graphs that are evaluated
by parallel runtime coming out of the arrow project, and we can also do fancy things like
look at non-standard evaluation, kind of unevaluated R expressions.
So when you write this in dplyr, these expressions don't get evaluated immediately, but we can
use LLVM to compile these expressions to go even faster against the data sets.
So anyway, I'm sorry about the AV problems, but these things happen.
But anyway, there's a lot of interesting things on the horizon for the project, and I'm excited
to collaborate with the R community, getting the software into production and making your
data science work faster and more efficient and hopefully a little bit more fun.
So many of you may be aware about three years ago, Hadley and I started the Feather project,
which uses the arrow technology internally.
So another thing we'd like to see is an evolved version of Feather that has more features
and is faster and more efficient than what is there now.
So even if you're already a Feather user, even that will be improved eventually.
So anyway, check out the slides, and I'll be around the conference if you'd like to chat.
Thank you.